Document format function (#1374)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/functions/temporal/format.adoc

> :description: Cypher provides a function for creating dynamically formatted string representations of temporal instance and duration types.

Reviewer: I would keep this more general, especially if more will be added.
```suggestion
:description: Information about Cypher's function to format temporal instance and duration values.
```

:table-caption!:

[[query-functions-temporal-format]]
= Temporal functions - format

[[query-functions-temporal-format-function]]
== format()

> The format function creates dynamically formatted string representations of temporal instance and duration types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `format()` function creates dynamically formatted string representations of temporal instance and duration types.
```

The output format can be customized via the `pattern` parameter.

> Creating a pattern follows the rules for the link:https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html[Java DateTimeFormatter].

Reviewer 2: This links to Java 8, but we use 21:
https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/java.base/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html

> Creating a pattern follows the rules for the link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/java.base/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html[Java DateTimeFormatter].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `pattern` parameter follows the link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/java.base/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html[Java DateTimeFormatter].
```

If no pattern is specified, the function returns an ISO-formatted string.

.Details
|===
| *Syntax*         3+| `format(value[, pattern])`

> | *Description*    3+| Returns the temporal value as an ISO-formatted string or as a string formatted by the provided pattern.

Reviewer 2: Don't we normally say STRING etc in these descriptions?

.3+| *Arguments*     | *Name*    | *Type* | *Description*
                     | `value`   | `DATE \| LOCAL TIME \| ZONED TIME \| LOCAL DATETIME \| ZONED DATETIME \| DURATION` | A temporal value to be formatted.
                     | `pattern` | `STRING`                                                                           | A pattern used to format the temporal value. If the pattern is not provided the value will be formatted according to ISO 8601.
| *Returns*        3+| `STRING`
|===

[[query-functions-temporal-format-instance-types]]
== Instance types

> Cypher's instance types are `DATE`, `LOCAL TIME`, `ZONED TIME`, `LOCAL DATETIME` and `ZONED DATETIME`, refer to xref:/values-and-types/temporal.adoc#cypher-temporal-instants[temporal instants].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cypher's instance types are `DATE`, `LOCAL TIME`, `ZONED TIME`, `LOCAL DATETIME` and `ZONED DATETIME`.
For more information, see xref:/values-and-types/temporal.adoc#cypher-temporal-instants[Values and types -> temporal instants].
```

| `N`       | nano-of-day                | number       | 1234000000
| `V`       | time-zone ID               | zone-id      | America/Los_Angeles; Z; -08:30
| `v`       | generic time-zone name     | zone-name    | Pacific Time; PT
| `z`       | time-zone name             | zone-name    | Pacific Standard Time; PST
| `O`       | localized zone-offset      | offset-O     | GMT+8; GMT+08:00; UTC-08:00
| `X`       | zone-offset 'Z' for zero   | offset-X     | Z; -08; -0830; -08:30; -083015; -08:30:15
| `x`       | zone-offset                | offset-x     | +0000; -08; -0830; -08:30; -083015; -08:30:15
| `Z`       | zone-offset                | offset-Z     | +0000; -0800; -08:00
| `p`       | pad next                   | pad modifier | 1
| `"`       | escape for text            | delimiter    | 
| `'`       | single quote               | literal      | 
|===

.Considerations
|===
| Most characters yield a different output when they are repeated.
| Some characters cannot be applied to certain types, for instance, `u` cannot be used to construct a string for a `LOCAL TIME` because it represents a year which is not part of the temporal value.

> | For details, refer to the documentation of the link:https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html[Java DateTimeFormatter].

Reviewer 2: Same as above: https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/java.base/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html

> | For details, refer to the documentation of the link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/java.base/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html[Java DateTimeFormatter].

Reviewer: Do we need this link twice?

Usually, the Considerations points come just after the Description table, and I think just having the link in the Considerations table suffices.

| Any character that is not reserved, other than `[`, `]`, `{`, `}`, `#`, and `'`, are output directly. To ensure future compatibility it is recommended to wrap all characters that you want to output directly with single quotes.
|===

[[query-functions-temporal-format-duration-types]]
== Duration types

Use the characters in xref:#query-functions-temporal-format-duration-types-characters[] to create a string pattern for duration types.

> Cypher's duration type `DURATION` has components and component groups, see xref:values-and-types/temporal.adoc#cypher-temporal-accessing-components-durations[components of durations].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cypher's duration type `DURATION` has components and component groups.
For more information, see see xref:values-and-types/temporal.adoc#cypher-temporal-accessing-components-durations[Values and types -> components of durations].
```

> If the string pattern contains a character from a component group but does not contain a character denoting a longer duration from the same group, `format()` converts the longer duration to the equivalent duration with the character that is present, for example a missing `y` (year) will be converted to four quarters, if `q` is present in the string pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the string pattern contains a character from a component group but does not contain a character denoting a longer duration from the same group, `format()` converts the longer duration to the equivalent duration with the character that is present.
For example a missing `y` (year) will be converted to four quarters, if `q` is present in the string pattern.
```

> This is because without a reference point, there is no way of determining the specifics of a duration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because without a reference point, there is no way to determine the specifics of a duration.
```

RETURN format(d, "y 'years' q 'quarters' M 'months'") AS withYears, format(d, "q 'quarters' M 'months'") AS withoutYears

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

| withYears                     | withoutYears
| "1 years 1 quarters 1 months" | "5 quarters 1 months"
2+d|Rows: 1

|===
======

.Duration formatting, weeks converted to days
======

.Query
[source, cypher, indent=0]
----
WITH duration({weeks: 3, days: 4}) AS d
RETURN format(d, "w 'weeks' d 'days'") AS withWeeks, format(d, "d 'days'") AS withoutWeeks
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

| withWeeks                     | withoutWeeks
| "3 weeks 4 days"              | "25 days"
2+d|Rows: 1

|===

======

.Duration formatting with hours converted to minutes
======

.Query
[source, cypher, indent=0]
----
WITH duration({days: 4, hours: 5, minutes: 6, seconds: 7}) AS d
RETURN format(d, "m 'minutes' s 'seconds'") AS withMinutes, format(d, "s 'seconds'") AS withoutMinutes 
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

| withMinutes             | withoutMinutes
| "306 minutes 7 seconds" | "18367 seconds"
2+d|Rows: 1

|===

> Not how the days cannot be converted to hours and do not affect the query result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note how the days cannot be converted to hours and do not affect the query result.
```

> Note how the days cannot be converted to hours and do not affect the query result.

Reviewer: Im not sure I follow here? Can you add a short explanation?

Author: that was gibberish indeed - the example did not match at all what i wanted to point out. updated :+1:

:description: Information about Cypher's function to format temporal instance and duration values.
:table-caption!:

> [[query-functions-temporal-format]]
> = Temporal functions - format
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[[query-functions-temporal-format]]
= Temporal functions - format

Cypher's `format()` function function creates dynamically formatted string representations of temporal instance and duration types.
```

> [[query-functions-temporal-format-function]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[role=label--cypher-25-only label--new-Neo4j-2025.09]
[[query-functions-temporal-format-function]]
```

> [[query-functions-temporal-format-function]]
> == format()
> 
> The `format()` function creates dynamically formatted string representations of temporal instance and duration types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[role=label--new-Neo4j-2025.09 label--cypher-25-only]
[[query-functions-temporal-format-function]]
== format()

```

                     | `pattern` | `STRING`                                                                           | A pattern used to format the temporal value. If the pattern is not provided the value will be formatted according to ISO 8601.
| *Returns*        3+| `STRING`
|===

.Considerations
|===
| The output format can be customized via the `pattern` parameter.
| The `pattern` parameter follows the link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/java.base/java/time/format/DateTimeFormatter.html[Java DateTimeFormatter].
| If no pattern is specified, the function returns an ISO-formatted string.
| Most characters yield a different output when they are repeated.
| Some characters cannot be applied to certain types, for instance, `u` cannot be used to construct a string for a `LOCAL TIME` because it represents a year which is not part of the temporal value.
| Any character that is not reserved, other than `[`, `]`, `{`, `}`, `#`, and `'`, are output directly. To ensure future compatibility it is recommended to wrap all characters that you want to output directly with single quotes.
|===

[[query-functions-temporal-format-instance-types]]

> == Instance types

Reviewer: Instance types and duration types being H2 (==) might become confusing navigation wise if more format functions are introduced (usually the functions themselves are on the H2 level).

I'll leave it up to you change for now or not (and so long as there is only 1, I think its fine to leave as is), but just thought I'd point it out :)

Author: i'd say let's leave it for now, but definitely address it when we add more.
heading levels shouldn't interfere with anchored links either, so this sort of refactoring ought to be safe

----
WITH datetime('1986-11-18T6:04:45.123456789+01:00[Europe/Berlin]') AS dt
RETURN format(dt, "MM/dd/yyyy") AS EU, format(dt, "dd/MM/yyyy") AS US
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

| EU            | US
| "11/18/1986" | "18/11/1986"
2+d|Rows: 1

|===

======

.Instance formatting with day-of-week, month-of-year, day-of-month, era and year
======

.Query
[source, cypher, indent=0]
----
WITH datetime('1986-11-18T6:04:45.123456789+01:00[Europe/Berlin]') AS dt
RETURN format(dt, "EEEE, MMMM d, G uuuu") AS instanceString
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===

| instanceString
| "Tuesday, November 18, AD 1986"
1+d|Rows: 1

|===

Four occurrences of `E` and `M` (text presentations) output the full form of the day and month.

======

.Instance formatting with day-of-year and localized day-of-week
======

.Query
[source, cypher, indent=0]
----
WITH datetime('1986-11-18T6:04:45.123456789+01:00[Europe/Berlin]') AS dt
RETURN format(dt, "DDD'th day of the year,' c'rd day of the week'") AS instanceString
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===

| instanceString

> | "322th day of the year, 3rd day of the week"

Reviewer 2: I know it is just an example, but it bothers me that we don't say 322nd 😅

| Most characters yield a different output when they are repeated.
| Some characters cannot be applied to certain types, for instance, `u` cannot be used to construct a string for a `LOCAL TIME` because it represents a year which is not part of the temporal value.
| Any character that is not reserved, other than `[`, `]`, `{`, `}`, `#`, and `'`, are output directly. To ensure future compatibility it is recommended to wrap all characters that you want to output directly with single quotes.
|===

[[query-functions-temporal-format-instance-types]]
== Instance types

Cypher's instance types are `DATE`, `LOCAL TIME`, `ZONED TIME`, `LOCAL DATETIME` and `ZONED DATETIME`.
For more information, see xref:/values-and-types/temporal.adoc#cypher-temporal-instants[Values and types -> temporal instants].

Use the characters in xref:#query-functions-temporal-format-instance-types-characters[] to create a string pattern for instance types.

[[query-functions-temporal-format-instance-types-examples]]
=== Examples

.Instance formatting, European and US American dates
======

.Query
[source, cypher, indent=0]
----
WITH datetime('1986-11-18T6:04:45.123456789+01:00[Europe/Berlin]') AS dt

> RETURN format(dt, "MM/dd/yyyy") AS EU, format(dt, "dd/MM/yyyy") AS US

Author: ```suggestion
RETURN format(dt, "MM/dd/yyyy") AS US, format(dt, "dd/MM/yyyy") AS EU
```

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

> | EU            | US

Author: ```suggestion
| US            | EU
```

| If no pattern is specified, the function returns an ISO-formatted string.
| Most characters yield a different output when they are repeated.
| Some characters cannot be applied to certain types, for instance, `u` cannot be used to construct a string for a `LOCAL TIME` because it represents a year which is not part of the temporal value.
| Any character that is not reserved, other than `[`, `]`, `{`, `}`, `#`, and `'`, are output directly. To ensure future compatibility it is recommended to wrap all characters that you want to output directly with single quotes.
|===

[[query-functions-temporal-format-instance-types]]
== Instance types

Cypher's instance types are `DATE`, `LOCAL TIME`, `ZONED TIME`, `LOCAL DATETIME` and `ZONED DATETIME`.
For more information, see xref:/values-and-types/temporal.adoc#cypher-temporal-instants[Values and types -> temporal instants].

Use the characters in xref:#query-functions-temporal-format-instance-types-characters[] to create a string pattern for instance types.

[[query-functions-temporal-format-instance-types-examples]]
=== Examples

> .Instance formatting, European and US American dates

Author: ```suggestion
.Instance formatting, US American and European dates
```

                     | `pattern` | `STRING`                                                                           | A pattern used to format the temporal value. If the pattern is not provided the value will be formatted according to ISO 8601.
| *Returns*        3+| `STRING`
|===

[[query-functions-temporal-format-instance-types]]
== Instance types

Cypher's instance types are `DATE`, `LOCAL TIME`, `ZONED TIME`, `LOCAL DATETIME` and `ZONED DATETIME`, refer to xref:/values-and-types/temporal.adoc#cypher-temporal-instants[temporal instants].

Use the characters in xref:#query-functions-temporal-format-instance-types-characters[] to create a string pattern for instance types.

[[query-functions-temporal-format-instance-types-examples]]
=== Examples

.Instance formatting with year, month, day, hour, minute, second, fraction-of-second and zone-offset
======

.Query
[source, cypher, indent=0]
----
WITH datetime('1986-11-18T6:04:45.123456789+01:00[Europe/Berlin]') AS dt
RETURN format(dt, "yyyy-MM-dd'T'HH:mm:ss.SSSZ") AS x
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===

| x
| "1986-11-18T06:04:45.123+0100"

> 1+d|Rows: 1

Reviewer 3: I don't think we should lead with this test as it return the ISO representation of the datetime, e.g. it doesn't do anything new and useful.

| Any character that is not reserved, other than `[`, `]`, `{`, `}`, `#`, and `'`, are output directly. To ensure future compatibility it is recommended to wrap all characters that you want to output directly with single quotes.
|===

[[query-functions-temporal-format-duration-types]]
== Duration types

Use the characters in xref:#query-functions-temporal-format-duration-types-characters[] to create a string pattern for duration types.

Cypher's duration type `DURATION` has components and component groups, see xref:values-and-types/temporal.adoc#cypher-temporal-accessing-components-durations[components of durations].

If the string pattern contains a character from a component group but does not contain a character denoting a longer duration from the same group, `format()` converts the longer duration to the equivalent duration with the character that is present, for example a missing `y` (year) will be converted to four quarters, if `q` is present in the string pattern.
This is because without a reference point, there is no way of determining the specifics of a duration.

> For example, not all months have the same number of days, and switches to or from daylight saving time means that a day has 23 or 25 hours rather than 24.

Reviewer 3: I wonder if this should be omitted as we discuss this in `components of durations`

Author: only line 262, or the entire introduction?

Reviewer 3: Line 262 is my thinking, the reset it format specfic information

[[query-functions-temporal-format-duration-types-examples]]
=== Examples

> .Duration formatting, years converted to quarters

Reviewer 3: For all these test we use the full duration constructor, even when test don't use all component groups. As the `map` is big and ugly, do we want it in all tests? Or a smaller map with only relevant values?

.Duration formatting, weeks converted to days
======

.Query
[source, cypher, indent=0]
----
WITH duration({years: 1, months: 4, weeks: 3, days: 4, hours: 5, minutes: 6, seconds: 7, milliseconds: 8,  microseconds: 9, nanoseconds: 10}) AS d
RETURN format(d, "w 'weeks' d 'days'") AS withWeeks, format(d, "d 'days'") AS withoutWeeks
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

| withWeeks                     | withoutWeeks
| "3 weeks 4 days"              | "25 days"
2+d|Rows: 1

|===

======

.Duration formatting with hours converted to minutes
======

.Query
[source, cypher, indent=0]
----
WITH duration({years: 1, months: 4, weeks: 3, days: 4, hours: 5, minutes: 6, seconds: 7, milliseconds: 8,  microseconds: 9, nanoseconds: 10}) AS d
RETURN format(d, "m 'minutes' s 'seconds' N 'nanos'") AS withMinutes, format(d, "s 'seconds' N 'nanos'") AS withoutMinutes 
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

| withMinutes                           | withoutMinutes
| "306 minutes 7 seconds 8009010 nanos" | "18367 seconds 8009010 nanos"
2+d|Rows: 1

|===

======

[[query-functions-temporal-format-duration-types-characters]]

> === String pattern characters

Reviewer 3: Looks like there might be a line too much after this title

Author: the spacing in the preview?

i think this might be because of table title :thinking: it's correct in the source document (or rather, i'm pretty sure it wouldn't make a difference in this case)
